[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING]
[CLICKING]
LAWRENCE GUTH: Hey, everyone!
Today and this
week, we are going
to talk about the connection
between homogeneous dynamics
and projection theory.
Today is, by the way, the first
day of the Simons lectures.
Maryna Viazovska is
giving them this year.
And she's going to be
talking about sphere packing.
And I got interested
in this two years ago
when Elon Lindenstrauss came
to give the Simons lectures.
And he was talking about
homogeneous dynamics.
And he explained a little
bit this connection
with projection theory.
And I have been trying to
understand it since then.
And it's a pretty
geometric visual thing.
So I brought some tools with me.
The goal of the class is to
try to understand, visually,
geometrically, how
homogeneous dynamics is
related to projection theory.
So let's first say a little bit
what is homogeneous dynamics.
So we're going to be
working with spaces
that have a lot of symmetries.
And so the spaces will
come from a Lie group.
So G will be a Lie
group, for example,
S ln(R) And inside of G,
there'll be a discrete subgroup.
So e.g.
S ln(Z) And then we're going to
be studying the quotient space,
G mod gamma.
So this is called a
homogeneous space.
So we'll see it has
a lot of symmetries.
And so the homogeneous
and homogeneous dynamics
is reacting on this
homogeneous space.
Now, what does dynamics mean?
Suppose that H is
a subgroup of G.
And then if x is a
point in G mod gamma,
then we can look at H dot x.
So H acts on G mod gamma.
So we can talk about H dot x.
That's called an orbit.
And the question is to
describe the orbits.
So let's make a picture.
So in actual Lie group G--
group G looks like this--
there might be
some group element.
And then you could
take a coset H dot g,
and h might be non-compact.
So that might go on forever.
But somehow, it's
not that complicated.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: If we're taking the
quotient of G mod gamma, what
are the conditions for gamma
to be a normal subgroup
to allow this question?
LAWRENCE GUTH: So this
object is not a group.
It's just a space.
AUDIENCE: A space, OK.
LAWRENCE GUTH: So gamma is a--
so the question was about
whether gamma is normal.
And the answer is gamma
doesn't have to be normal.
So this is not a normal
subgroup of this.
That means that this is not a
group, but it's still a space.
So G mod gamma--
oh, and I'll put something else.
So G mod gamma, we'll
assume that the volume--
we'll be interested in cases
where the volume of G mod gamma
is finite.
So the volume of G is infinite,
but the volume of G mod gamma
is finite.
So G mod gamma looks
sort of like this.
And so then a point x in there,
and the orbit goes through x,
but then it wraps around.
The picture looks a lot
more complicated already.
And we want to understand
what does this do.
Is it going to
wrap back on itself
and just go around over and
over again, the same thing?
Or is it going to
evenly distribute
all over G mod gamma
or something else?
So to make it concrete, I'd
like to begin with a very simple
warm up, which is with
a commutative group.
So it's simpler than that.
So I think the simplest example
of this is that G could be R2,
and then gamma could be Z2.
So G mod gamma is R2 mod Z2.
It's a torus.
And H is going to
be a subgroup of G.
And let's say it's like
a one-parameter subgroup.
We'll do a couple of examples.
H could be the subgroup t, 2t.
t in R. There's
a subgroup of R2.
And if we do this, what happens?
So I'll visualize G mod gamma as
a square with sides identified.
And if I were to take--
so let's say x0 is
just gamma, which
is an element of G mod gamma.
It's like you take the
identity in G and push it down.
So what is the orbit
through x0 look like?
Well, it's this line of
slope 2 looks like that.
And then it comes
back where it started.
And it just keeps
going like that.
And actually, it wouldn't
be-- it's a little harder
to draw accurately, but it
wouldn't be different if you
started at any other point.
So x, if you start
at any point x,
then if I were to
add 1 comma 2, that
would be equal to
x in R2 mod Z2.
And so, actually, every
orbit is periodic.
So the conclusion
in example one is
that H dot x is
periodic for every x.
Example two, I'll take a
different one-parameter
subgroup, t comma square root of
2t t in R. So now what happens?
Well, if I, again, start
at x0, it's the identity.
And now I'm going up at slope
square root of 2 at the top.
And keep going at
slope square root of 2.
And this time, this
will never close up
because the slope is irrational.
And in fact, this orbit will be
dense and evenly distributed.
So now what happens is that
H dot x is dense for every x.
I won't do a proof right
now, but I'll make a remark.
So there are several
proofs, but there's
a nice proof using Fourier
analysis that we might talk
about later if we feel like it.
Questions or comments so far?
So we've seen two
things that can happen.
The orbit could be periodic.
And the orbit could be dense.
And we haven't yet
seen other things,
but we might wonder about
whether other things could
happen.
And now we can shift to a more
complicated noncommutative
group, like SL2(R).
So now let's say G is
SL2(R) and gamma is SL2(Z).
There are multiple reasons for
looking at these quotients, G
mod gamma.
But one of them that comes up
for this particular example
is that these
parametrize lattices.
So G mod gamma is
the space of lattices
in R2 with the property lattices
lambda in R2 with the property
that the area of
R2 mod lambda is 1.
So let's do a proof sketch.
Any such lattice, we
can write as g times
the lattice Z squared,
where G is in SL2(R).
Make any lattice by
starting with Z squared,
and applying a linear
transformation.
However, there is
more than one G
that gives you the same lambda.
So if H is in SL2(Z),
then hZ2 is Z2.
And therefore, G times
hZ2 is g times Z2.
And these guys give
you the same lattice.
So the space of lattices
is g modulo SL2(Z).
Now, this space of lattices,
G mod gamma, is not compact.
And I will give you an example
of a sequence of lattices
that don't converge
to anything--
don't have a subsequence
that converge to anything.
So for example, we could
take lambda epsilon
to be epsilon Z direct
sum epsilon inverse.
So this is a lattice, which is
very skinny in one direction
and very tall in
the other direction.
It has covolume one.
And as epsilon goes
to 0, this is not
going to converge to anything.
So the space of
lattices is not compact.
And this is the only reason
that the space of lattices
is not compact.
So a definition, K epsilon
is a subset of G mod gamma.
K epsilon is defined to
be the set of lattices
so that the minimum over nonzero
v in our lattice of the size
of v is at least epsilon--
is greater than or equal
to, let's say, epsilon.
And there's a proposition,
which is called the Mahler
criterion, that says for
every epsilon bigger than 0,
K epsilon is compact.
So a picture of G mod gamma
is something like this.
G mod gamma is
three-dimensional,
so it's not super easy to draw.
But over here, so this
would be G mod gamma.
There's this noncompact part.
And we'll make a
cut off maybe here.
And this stuff is K epsilon.
So I won't prove this in detail.
This is not super difficult. If
you think about two vectors that
generate lambda, if
we're in K epsilon,
the vectors definitely
cannot be too close to 0.
And you can also
always find two vectors
that are not too giant, because
the area of the thing is one.
And this gives you a compact set
of choices of these two vectors.
So that gives a little bit of
intuition about what the space G
mod gamma looks like.
Now, inside of there, we have
some interesting one-parameter
subgroups of G of SL2(R).
So one of them is the
unipotent subgroup.
So that's the set of
1, t, 0, 1, t in R.
And the other one is
the diagonal subgroup.
So I'll call this--
so it's the set of UT.
So this matrix is U sub t.
And there's the diagonal
subgroup, e to the r,
e to the minus r, 0, 0,
little r in the reals.
And this I'll call
the set of a sub r.
So this matrix here
is called a sub r.
So those are
one-parameter subgroups.
And now we can ask our question
about what the orbits look like.
So there's a theorem that
goes back to the 1930s,
Hedlund in the 1930s.
He said that a U orbit is
either periodic or dense.
But in contrast, there's a--
I guess I'll also
call it a theorem--
I don't know who
proved this one--
that D orbit does
not have to be maybe
neither periodic nor dense.
Let me say something
more than that
about how these D orbits can
be really quite complicated.
So here's G mod gamma.
And inside of G
mod gamma, pick out
three small balls that are
not too close together.
So B1, B2, B3 are small balls.
Then for any sequence
of 1's and 2's, so
for example, the sequence
1121212221, any sequence,
there exists an x in G mod gamma
so that the D orbit of x never
hits B3.
And the D orbit of x hits B1 and
B2 many times in this sequence.
So what must this
orbit look like?
Let's see.
So first, it hits B1.
It goes through there.
Then it goes around, and the
next thing it hits is also B1.
And it goes around.
And the next thing
it hits is B2.
And it keeps going.
And the next thing it
hits is B1, and so on.
And it never touches B3.
So this orbit,
apparently, is not dense,
because it never intersects B3.
And it is not periodic if
this sequence is not periodic.
So it's something else.
So D orbits can do this somewhat
crazy thing, somewhat chaotic
thing.
But U orbits can't.
U orbits can be periodic.
So if you were to take U
of x0, this is periodic.
And the reason is--
so if you take--
so x0 corresponds to the
matrix 1, 1 times SL2(Z).
So now if I were to
take 1, 1, t, x0,
that's equal to x0 in G mod
gamma if t is an integer.
So that's a periodic orbit.
It makes a closed
circle in G mod gamma.
But if you were to start with
a kind of weird-looking choice
of x0, and you were
to do this, then
there won't be any obvious
periodicity, so for most x.
So let's suppose now x is
root 2, 0, 0, 1 over root 2.
So now what happens when we--
and then times SL2(Z).
So now what is UT of x?
That's 1, 1, t, root
2, 0, 1 over root 2.
So that will be root 2.
That will be root 2.
That will be t over root 2.
This will be 0.
This will be 1 over root 2.
Oh, that one might be periodic.
I think I picked
the wrong example.
Yeah, yeah.
OK, sorry.
That was unhelpful.
So to see why they're
not all periodic,
let's instead try
to visualize what
is happening to the lattice.
So a point x corresponds
to a lattice lambda x.
And if you think about what
is happening if you take gx,
that corresponds to the
lattice g of lambda of x.
So g is in SL2(R).
It acts on R2.
It moves the lattice
to another lattice.
And that's what the action is.
And so now g is going to be ut.
And the way ut acts
on R2 is by shearing.
So ut acts on R2 by shearing.
So I'll do it this way.
So I'll draw some points in R2.
And perhaps,
coincidentally, these points
come from a lattice.
And then I'll
illustrate what ut does.
So if this is the point p,
then this over here is ut of p.
It's a shearing motion.
And so the shearing motion
moves everybody horizontally.
And it moves you
horizontally by an amount
proportional to your height.
So this one moves
horizontally, but a bit less.
And this one moves
horizontally a bit more.
Now, what would it mean?
So you start with a lattice.
And when we apply this
unipotent orbit to the lattice,
every point in the
lattice is shearing.
What would it mean if
the orbit was periodic?
Well, it would mean that this
point, this lattice point
is shearing along
and eventually it
reaches another lattice point?
So if ux is periodic,
that implies
that each lattice point
is at the same height
as another lattice point.
So there must be another lattice
point somewhere over here.
But now, think about this.
This difference is
also in our lattice,
because the lattice
is a subgroup.
And this distance is horizontal.
So this is if and
only if there exists--
if and only if lambda of x
contains a vector of the form
x1 comma 0.
So most lattices don't contain
a vector on the x-axis.
So u times x is
usually not periodic.
And then the difficult
theorem is in that
situation u times x is dense.
So this is the situation in SL2.
The situation in other Lie
groups, say SLn(R) for larger n,
is more difficult
and more recent,
but there are similar theorems.
For SL3(R), Margulis and Dani
in the 1980s proved an analog
of this theorem.
And then for all the SLn(R)
, and all the groups, Ratner,
around 1990 proved an
analog of this theorem.
So that's a little summary
of some kinds of theorems.
There's some different
motivations for this.
There's some
motivation from-- yeah.
AUDIENCE: I have just a
question about the link
between the lattices and the
elements of the quotient group.
So up there in the
definition of K epsilon,
there's kind of what looks
like some sort of norm,
the minimum size of v, or the
nonzero vector v in the lattice.
Does that generate
the same topology
as the quotient
topology from SL2(R)?
LAWRENCE GUTH: So
the question is
about the topology
of G mod gamma
and how the topology
plays with this
definition of K epsilon.
In a moment, we'll put
a metric on G mod gamma.
And that's what
this topology is.
It's a manifold.
It has a topology manifold.
And this thing here is
a continuous function
on our space of lattices.
Another way to say
what the topology is,
if you describe a lattice as the
span of two particular vectors,
if you slightly perturb those
particular vectors, that
will be a slight change
in the space of lattices.
AUDIENCE: Is that
definition similar
in any way to have a minimum?
Yeah, I guess you're right.
It's not quite-- thanks.
LAWRENCE GUTH: So when I
introduced homogeneous dynamics,
I mentioned some application
in number theory connection
to the Oppenheim-Davenport
conjecture,
which is about the values
of quadratic forms.
That's a nice connection.
I feel like we already
talked about it a little bit.
And if you wanted
to read about it,
it's also easy to read about it.
So I wanted to spend
the class time on--
so I wanted to
spend the class time
on trying to get intuition
for why something like this
would be true, and also
maybe why something like this
would be false.
And there are many
different ways
of thinking about
homogeneous dynamics.
There's a big
literature, but I want
to highlight the
way of connecting it
to projection theory.
And that's not one of
the classical ways.
It's actually not super easy
to find in the literature.
So it appears in
these recent works
of Lindenstrauss and Mohammadi
and their collaborators,
and they're trying--
they're doing the cutting
edge of homogeneous dynamics.
And the particular problem
they're trying to solve
is to do, first of
all, these higher
dimensional things that Margulis
and Ratner and Dani were doing.
And second of all,
instead of having
a qualitative theorem like this,
to have a quantitative theorem
that says, if you're
not approximately
periodic for some length, then
you're quantitatively dense.
And at that point, they
ran into some things
that many interesting
classical techniques could not
do, or could not obviously do.
And they invented this new
technique, this connection
to projection theory.
But in hindsight, you
could also look back
at the oldest theorems, the
oldest theorems like this one,
and you could approach it
using projection theory.
And it may not be the best
approach to this theorem.
It's certainly not the only
But it's a way of looking
at it and quite a visual way
of looking at what's going on.
So the goal of the
class is to try
to explain how projection
theory could help to understand
something like this.
So we're going to
do some geometry.
So next, we need to think about
the geometry on the space G mod
gamma and how that geometry
interacts with the action.
So geometry of G mod
gamma, so first, we'll
talk about the right
action of G on itself.
So if G is in G, there's
a right action, which
is a map from G to itself.
And the right
action G of h is h.
And you multiply by
G on the right side.
So these groups don't commute.
So it matters which
side you put it on.
And actually, you have to be
quite careful in this story.
So that's a map
from G to itself.
Now, we're going to
use that to start
to put a geometry on
G. We're going to have
a right invariant metric m.
So how does this work?
So what does that mean?
So m is going to be a
Riemannian metric on G.
And for every g in G, we
have this right action G. So
that's a map from our group
with its metric to itself.
And this is-- for every g
in G, this is an isometry.
That's what it means to have
a right invariant metric.
Where do they come from?
The idea is that we'll put
a metric at the origin,
and then we'll use R sub g
to help define the metric
at every other place.
So a lot of what we'll say
here works for any group.
But to be concrete, I'm going
to stick to the group SL2(R).
The tangent space at the
origin, so e is the identity.
I was using the word origin.
I should say identity. e is
the identity in the group.
The tangent space in the
identity of this group
is the space of matrices A, B,
C, D with a plus d equal to 0.
So this is not a deep factor.
So SL2(R) is matrices A, B, C,
D, where ad minus bc equals 1.
And the identity is a matrix
that's sitting in there in R4.
So the group is a
3-dimensional manifold in R4.
And this is just its tangent
space in the usual sense.
So that's a tangent space.
So now, m0 is going to
be a metric on T e G.
And I can specify
it by specifying who
on an orthonormal basis.
And this choice doesn't
matter super a lot,
but there's a convenient choice.
So my orthonormal basis of
m0 is going to be 0, 1, 0, 0,
which I'll call u.
0, 0, 1, 0, which
I'll call u tilde.
And then 1 over root 2,
0, 0, minus 1 over 2,
which I'll call d.
These root 2's are not
actually important.
But this orthonormal
basis happens
to be the orthonormal basis
that corresponds to the metric
where you just take
the metric on R4
and restrict it
to this subspace.
So now how will we define
the metric elsewhere?
So now suppose g
is in our group.
R sub g of the identity is g.
It's easy to check from
the definition of R sub g.
And therefore, R sub g defines
a map from tangent space e of G
to the tangent space g of G.
And this map is an isomorphism.
If we have a metric
over here, we
use this map to define
a metric over there.
So now we define mg, which
is a metric or inner product,
mg on TgG so that Rg
goes from TeG comma m0
to TgG comma mg so that
that's an isometry.
And then it's an exercise to
check that this thing we just
defined is right invariant.
So that all of these maps
are isometries everywhere.
So now, because m is right
invariant, we get a metric.
It extends to a metric
m on G mod gamma.
So how does that work?
So we have all of G. We
have a projection map
pi to G mod gamma.
We have a point
x in G mod gamma.
And x has many preimages.
So x is equal to, say,
little g times little g--
little h times gamma.
So the preimage of x is
these many different points.
And I have a metric upstairs.
And I'd like to try to
define a metric downstairs
in a natural way.
So I like to define
a metric here.
So for each of these
lifts upstairs,
I can take the metric there.
And I can use the map pi.
And I can produce
a metric over here.
There's no canonical
choice of which
of these purple points in
the preimage I should use.
But because our metric
upstairs is right invariant,
they all give the same answer.
And so there's a
coherent choice.
So that gives us a
metric on G mod gamma.
So now we have also a
left action of G on G.
So if g is in G, the left
action of g is also a map from G
to itself.
Left action g of h is g
inverse on the left h.
So the word left
in left action is
because the thing that
comes from g is over here.
The inverse is not super
important in our discussion
today, but it causes this
to behave correctly when you
compose elements in the group.
And so it's
traditional to do this.
Lg is not an isometry of our
group with our right invariant
metric.
And that's very important.
It's very important to
our whole discussion
to understand, geometrically,
how this operation affects
this space.
So let's see what happens.
So it's easiest to see what
happens around the identity.
And you can do it starting
at other points, too.
So here's the identity.
And here's some g.
And I have a map,
the left action,
by g inverse that takes
the identity over here.
And now, this action,
it's not clear from what
we've said whether it
preserves the metric.
In fact, it distorts the metric.
But how can we figure
out what this mapping
is doing to the metric?
Well, our metric was defined
to be right invariant.
So there's a map going
the other direction,
the right action by g inverse.
That takes g back
to the identity.
And this one we do understand
what it does to the metric.
It's an isometry.
So if I want to understand what
this map did to the metric,
it's a reasonable idea to
look at this, and then this.
That part is an isometry.
So all of the distortion of
the metric came from this part.
And this composition is
going to be a little easier
to understand.
So what happens if I do this,
if I take a left action by g
inverse and a right action by
g inverse and I apply it to h?
These guys commute
with each other.
We'll see when we write it out.
So I don't have to be super
careful what order to write them
in.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: Is one of
these [INAUDIBLE]?
LAWRENCE GUTH: What's that?
AUDIENCE: Oh, never mind.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
I guess I should really
write it in the other order.
Although, it doesn't matter.
So I want you to
imagine I started
with e, or maybe
somebody else near e,
I applied left g inverse, and
then I applied right g inverse.
And we're going to
see what happens.
So just from the formulas,
this is right action
of g inverse of gh.
And that's g h inverse.
So actually, it's something
natural and important.
It's conjugating.
So I'll call this C sub g
of h, conjugating g by h.
So conjugating by h
then induces a map
from the tangent
space of e to itself.
So conjugating by G is a map
from the group to itself.
And it sends the
identity to the identity.
And therefore, it
sends the tangent space
to the tangent space.
And we can see what--
we can write this down.
And we can see what it does.
And if this thing is
distorting the geometry,
it means that this thing
was distorting the geometry
in exactly the same way.
So we could say more than
this, but the singular values
of Lg inverse are equal to
the singular values of Cg.
So what they are depends on g.
So I'm going to pick a nice g.
And we're actually
going to compute
them to see how the
geometry is being distorted.
So the interesting
g's are going to be
from those one-parameter
subgroups up there.
And the one that
looks the nicest
and where this calculation
is the most important
is for that diagonal matrix ar.
So we're going to
compute what that is.
So I'm going to look at Car.
That goes from the
tangent space to itself.
So the tangent space is the
set of matrices a, b, c,
d with a plus b equals 0.
And let's call this
matrix M. And so Car of M
is ar M ar inverse.
That's e to the r, e to
the minus r a, b, c, d,
e to the minus r, e to the r.
So this is a sub r.
That's just a definition.
This is a sub r inverse,
so I switch the minus signs
I did this very carefully.
It's not super instructive to
watch me do it very carefully.
So I'm just going to
write down the answer.
It's a, d, e to the 2r
b, e to the minus 2r c.
So this conjugation,
what it does
is it doesn't
change the diagonal.
It magnifies this component.
And d magnifies that component.
That happens to be
something we can
describe really nicely in the
orthonormal basis that I picked.
So Car of u, so it
is e to the 2r u.
Car of u tilde is e to the minus
2r u tilde, and Car of d is d.
This conjugation behaves
really nicely in this basis,
but you can see that it does
not preserve the metric.
It stretches that one.
It compresses that one.
And it preserves that one.
So the conclusion from this
is that L ar inverse of u,
the length of that is e to the
2r L ar inverse of u tilde has
length e to the minus
2r L ar inverse.
d has length of 1.
And it also preserved angles.
So we just stretched things,
but we didn't tilt anything.
So L ar inverse of u of u
tilde and of d are orthogonal.
So this describes how the
left action by this matrix
is distorting the
geometry of the space.
And we also can make
some kind of picture.
So suppose this is a,
quote, unquote, "cube" in G,
where this is the u direction.
This is the u tilde direction.
And the direction into the
board is the d direction.
So what will happen
to it when we do this?
The u direction
gets really long.
The u tilde direction
gets really short.
The other direction
is preserved.
So it looks kind of like that.
One thing that you can
notice from the picture
and from the calculation is
that while L ar inverse distorts
lengths, distorts the
metric, it nevertheless
preserves the volume.
So that's how the left
action distorts the geometry.
And we also have a left
action of G on G mod gamma.
And so how does that work?
Well, Lg of h gamma is
just g inverse h gamma.
Because the gamma
is on the right,
and this guy is on
the left, they sort of
don't interfere with each other.
And so this is an
actual group action.
So Lg maps G mod
gamma to itself.
And it is a bijection.
It distorts the metric.
But it preserves the volume.
And maybe I should
say, we just computed
this carefully for
a particular element
g, which is these
diagonal elements.
You could take any g.
It doesn't have to be diagonal.
It will distort the metric
in some different way.
Every g is different, but
they all preserve the volume.
We didn't really prove that,
because I just did one example,
but it's true.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: Are you able
to show that by showing
that the second u of t is
a one-parameter subgroup?
It doesn't change the volume.
And do those two one-parameter
subgroups generate a G of gamma?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
So the question
was, if we wanted
to check that it preserved--
that every g preserves
the volume, it would be enough
to check a few g's that generate
it.
And yeah, so if we
did the computation
with the unipotent 1, that
would basically finish the job.
So it's not that difficult.
We also could just describe
the g as a, b, c, d, and then
the computation
is a little messy,
but we could just
check once and for all.
There's probably a
better way of doing it,
but that's not my part of math.
So now we can say--
so now, an important and
interesting part of this story
is what is the difference
between the unitary ones
and the diagonal ones.
And there are many
different answers to this.
We could come back
to it multiple times,
but I'm going to mention
one way of looking
at it, which will start to get
us to the projection theory.
So there's a special
feature of unitary matrices
that we saw also
maybe by coincidence,
but it also came up when
we were talking about SL2
of Fp, which what we saw there
basically is that something cool
happens when you
conjugate a unitary matrix
by a diagonal matrix.
And that is the special
feature of unitary matrices.
And it really helps
to understand them.
So what is special
about unitary matrices?
So there's a computation that
if I take a unitary matrix,
and I conjugate it
by a diagonal matrix.
So I have e to r,
e to the minus r.
AUDIENCE: Should
it be unipotent?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Unipotent, yeah.
Thanks Yes, thank
you, unipotent.
So if you multiply
this out, you get this.
So if you're interested in
a unipotent matrix ut, where
this t is really large, you can
get at it by starting with u1,
and conjugating it by one
of these diagonal matrices.
So let's say u0t, this is
a set of unitary matrices.
This is ut.
t goes from 0 to t.
And so to understand
an orbit, our goal
is to understand u0 t
of x, where t is large.
And because of this slick little
formula, we can write u0t x.
So let's say we can write
it as ar u01 a minus R of x,
where e to the 2r is T.
Why is this helpful?
So this here is just some
point in G mod gamma.
It's not the point
we started with.
It's some other point,
but it's just a point.
This here is a
short unitary orbit.
A short unitary orbit isn't
so intimidating to draw.
And then all the action is here.
And the question is,
what does this map
do to a short unitary orbit?
So if we make a picture,
here's our G mod gamma.
Here is our new starting
point, a minus R x.
Here is our orbit.
It's not very long.
It doesn't wrap around yet,
so it's not that intimidating.
That's this guy,
short unitary orbit.
And now we're going to take this
map of G mod gamma to itself.
And we're going to apply it.
We want to see what
happens to this blue thing.
Again, unipotent, fix.
Short, unipotent.
Thanks.
And we can also make a remark.
aR is a subgroup.
So aR is like a1 to
the R over a little r
to the big R over little r.
Big R, little r is
a natural number.
So we don't have to
do this all at once.
We could take a less dramatic
map from G mod gamma to itself,
and we repeat that
over and over again.
We want to see what
happens to this thing.
So we are led to try--
so we are led to
a goal, which is
to try to understand
and visualize
the action of a little
r on G mod gamma.
And if we understand
that really well,
we should be able to
understand this orbit.
All right, so how might we
try to get a handle on this?
Let's look at a
fundamental domain.
So F is a fundamental
domain of G mod gamma.
F is a subset of G. And
I'll draw it as a cube.
It's not literally a cube.
G mod gamma is not compact.
So F cannot be compact.
So it should have a little tail
that's going off to infinity.
But for what I'm about to say,
that's not super important.
Actually, by the
way, the whole story
also makes sense for
gammas that are cocompact.
And then this picture
would be better.
So now, we'd like to
understand what a does.
So the first step is
I'm going to apply aR.
And we just thought about
what aR does, geometrically,
how it distorts the geometry.
We were looking at what
it does to the metric,
but it's very similar to
what it does to a unit cube.
So this thing is going to be--
so this is aR of F, which is
still sitting in the group
G. It got longer in one
way, shorter in another way.
The real thing would have
more dimensions than this,
but just to give the idea.
Now, the next thing
that happens is
we have to apply
the quotient map.
So pi is the map from
G to G mod gamma.
And when we do that, I'll
visualize G mod gamma, again,
as this fundamental domain.
And what happens
is that this thing
is going to wrap around
the fundamental domain.
So it will look
something like this.
There, it'll go in there.
It's very difficult
to draw this well.
This map from the
fundamental domain to itself
is going to be a bijection.
So somehow this is
going to wrap around.
It's going to cover
every point exactly once.
It's like some sort of a
beautiful jigsaw puzzle.
I don't know how to draw that.
So I'll just do--
I'll just have
this come out here,
and I'll do a dot, dot, dot.
And then I don't know.
If we were visualizing, if
we had something of interest,
eventually, it would be
some unipotent orbits,
but maybe, initially,
we're interested in what
happens to that.
So in the first
step, I did this.
And then in the next step,
we see this and this.
Somewhere over
here, we see this.
Cool.
So yeah.
AUDIENCE: Why does the math
have to be a bijection?
Why can't the projection
map not be injective?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
So the question is, why
is this map a bijection?
So we were saying--
so this-- I guess
it's actually there.
So we said earlier that the
left action of G, G mod gamma
goes to itself is a bijection.
And if we believe
that, then if we
start with the
fundamental domain,
we have one representative
of each point in G mod gamma.
And then we end up
back in G mod gamma.
We should cover
everything exactly
once if this is a bijection.
Now, why was this a bijection?
So what is this map?
It's the map h gamma goes
to g inverse h gamma.
So why is this a bijection?
So it's injective.
That means that if h1
g inverse h1 gamma is
equal to g inverse h2 gamma,
then h1 gamma equals h2 gamma.
That's what it means
for it to be injective.
So is this clear?
Yeah, you multiply
on both sides by g.
Surjective, that means
that for every h2 in G,
there exists h1 in G, so that
g inverse h1 gamma is h2 gamma.
So yeah, we set these
equal, and solve for g.
AUDIENCE: I guess that
causes the invertibility
of the [INAUDIBLE].
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
Yeah.
I have to say, I went
through this, too.
When I drew these
pictures, I asked myself,
is this actually going to
fold up and cover everything
exactly once?
And then I was like,
is it really bijective?
Yeah, it should happen.
I guess you can make easier fun
examples that are more linear.
So you just have a matrix
acting on R2 mod Z2,
or something like that.
And then the fundamental
domain is a square.
And you can draw
what happens to it.
And you can look up-- so this
was inspired by that example.
They called that the cat
map, a particular map.
And instead of a smiley
face, they draw a cat.
They have better
artistic skills than me.
You can google that, and see
some nice pictures like this.
OK, cool.
So here, this thing, Lg Ll
with this diagonal action,
you've broken it into two steps.
And out of these two steps, I
find this one quite confusing.
It's difficult to write this
down sufficiently accurately,
and then to say
what happened here.
And did this come
back over here,
over there when it wrapped?
Where did it wrap?
All of that seems very
intimidating to me,
so very difficult to
write down in a clean way.
But this first
step is not so bad.
And so we're going to try to
understand the first step very
well and use that to see
how much we can figure out
about this map Lg acting
on our homogeneous space.
Now, the object that
we want to follow
is not a smiley face,
but a unipotent orbit.
Let's see here.
I guess we can erase all of it.
So I erased something
that is useful for us.
So recall, we worked out that
the left map by ar inverse,
we found its singular
values and singular vectors.
So in the u direction, the
length of this is e to the 2r.
And in the u tilde direction,
the length is e to the minus 2r.
And in the diagonal
direction, the length is 1.
So this is if we're thinking of
L ar inverse from TeG to TarG.
And this little u, this is
also the tangent direction
of our group u.
So that group is going
to get stretched,
which is the same thing we saw
in the computation over there.
Step one, so if we start with
a single unipotent orbit,
it starts at some
point like this.
So that's u 0, 1
of some point x.
What happens when we apply Lar?
Well, this thing is going
to get tall and skinny.
And the direction
that got stretched
is the direction of this orbit.
So now we're going
to have a long orbit.
And the height of this
thing is e to the 2r.
Then we're getting a quotient.
So when we quotient,
I don't know
exactly where it's going to go.
But it will go along--
it'll go out the top
and come in the
bottom somewhere.
And then we'll have
a bunch of these.
So we'll have e to the
2r u orbits of length 1.
And I have no idea
where they are.
So we haven't made
any progress yet
on our main question, which is
to see if these are distributing
kind of evenly.
But now we can start again.
So let me move this over here.
So now we have a bunch
of unipotent orbits.
And we're going to
stretch them out.
Now, what happens when we
stretch them out this time?
So each one of them got longer.
It's going to go from
the bottom to the top.
But also, there's also
some compression, which
is kind of in this direction.
And that could potentially
cause some orbits
to get closer together, or not.
And this is the
part that we have
to understand really carefully.
AUDIENCE: So this box is
some small box [INAUDIBLE]?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
So this--
AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
That's right.
So this box here is
a fundamental domain.
So it's scale 1.
And sure, it could be
around the identity.
The thing I most want
to convey in this class
is a feeling for how this map
is like twisting and distorting
these curves.
And so I'm going to try to
make a really big picture of it
there.
I also brought
with me some props.
So I'm going to visualize our
fundamental domain or maybe
a piece of it as a cylinder.
And I'm going to draw
some unipotent orbits
in different colors.
And they all go from
the bottom to the top.
Maybe I'll draw three of them.
Now, what happens
to this picture?
So first of all, it's
going to stretch that way.
That part's not that
hard to imagine.
It would go off the board.
So I'm not going
to emphasize that.
Then each one of
these slices, so we
have some slices that say this
is t equals 0 up to t equals 1--
other t's in the middle.
Each one of these
slices, one direction
is going to be squished,
and the other direction
is going to stay the same.
So let's say that at t equals 1
cross-section of this picture,
I see a triangle
that looks like this.
And there's going to be some
direction that gets compressed.
When I apply Lar inverse, that
direction gets compressed.
The output is going
to look like so.
And that has been
actually worked
out so that this blue and yellow
get kind of squished together.
And orange is still there.
And at t equals 0, if I
look at the bottom disk,
I have the same picture.
And there's some direction
that's going to be compressed.
And it's not the same direction.
I do somewhat
arbitrarily that one.
If you compress that way, that
will look sort of like so.
And the blue point
will be over here.
And the yellow and orange point
will be somewhat close together.
And as you look at all
the intermediate heights,
you'll have a similar picture.
But this compression
direction is
going to be changing
continuously as you go up.
So I'm not sure if
this will be helpful,
but I brought several
props to try to illustrate
this important process.
So if you imagine that you have
a bunch of unipotent orbits
in your homogeneous
space like so,
and we apply a, first of all,
they will stretch this way.
And second of all, there
will be some compression.
So maybe at the top, they might
get smooshed together this way.
And at the bottom,
they might get
smooshed together a different
way, sort of like this.
Or if this piece of Play-Doh
is this cylinder here,
what's going to happen to
it when we apply the map?
Well, it's going to get taller.
And it's going to get squished.
And maybe the top will
get squished that way.
But the bottom will
And in the middle,
it'll get squished
some direction in the middle.
And that will-- if I
had done it carefully.
I practiced it at home.
It produces something
that's sort of like a helix.
So let me say briefly
why this is relevant.
And then if we have
time, if we feel like it,
we could try to do some
computations with matrices
to check.
So why is this relevant?
Well, if you had a
situation like this, then--
yeah, OK, let's go back up here.
So this guy is really tall.
We're going to cut it
into a sequence of pieces
that each have height 1.
And each one of these pieces
is going to fold back in.
So over here, there
is an unused color.
There's a purple
piece over here.
That purple piece is going
to fold back in over here.
Can you see that?
And then there are a
bunch of other pieces
of different colors.
Those other pieces will somehow
get slotted in in an order
that I don't understand at all,
but they'll all go somewhere.
Now, inside of this purple
piece, so over here,
we have a yellow orbit, a blue
orbit, and an orange orbit.
Let's just focus on those three.
They are all going
to pass through here.
And we could have the blue
orbit and the orange orbit
and the yellow orbit all kind
of spread out from each other.
Or it could be that
they are smooshed
together close to each other.
Anyway, whatever
happens here, this
is just slotted in over here.
So that will tell us how
they're spaced over here.
When we have
something like this,
that will produce two
unit length unipotent
orbits over here in
this purple thing that
are really close to each other.
And that phenomenon is the enemy
of the unipotent orbit spreading
out.
Unipotent orbit is definitely
going to be really long,
but it may not
spread out because it
may have many segments that
are really close to each other.
Let me scribe.
So to prove that u0t
of x spreads out,
we want to prove that
coincidences of this type
are rare.
And why are they rare?
Well, they're rare because this
compression angle is rotating
smoothly as we vary t.
And so even though there
may be one projection that
smooshes a lot of
things together,
we have learned in
this course that if you
look at the projection in
all different directions,
most of them do not smoosh
things together very much.
And that forces this
unipotent orbit to spread out.
AUDIENCE: I'm sorry.
I'm a little confused.
Why doesn't the direction
get compressed and changed?
From that picture, after
we applied LaR inverse,
it's always long.
[INAUDIBLE] another direction.
LAWRENCE GUTH:
Yeah, OK, all right.
So the question is,
why does this happen?
And in fact, there was
a point that the picture
that I drew up
there sort of makes
it look like it doesn't happen.
Correct?
So in my picture, this
is not exactly accurate,
but I drew it as though
this map was just
a linear map that takes a
cube to a rectangular solid.
And I drew it as though--
well, I tried to
show that this--
so these unipotent orbits
are more or less vertical.
So here's what would work.
So if the unipotent orbits
were literally vertical
and if this map was
literally a linear map,
then this would not happen.
The compression direction would
be the same at every height.
So I think you have to pick--
this Lie group is like
it's a submanifold of R4.
But if you want to
represent it in coordinates
in three dimensions, you
have to make a choice.
There's not a completely
canonical choice.
So we could make the
choice that the unipotent
orbits were literally vertical.
And if we did that, this picture
would not be right anymore.
If we did that, then this
would have a bit of a twist.
This would be more--
this would be like
a helix thing.
Or another way of
looking at it is
I think we could choose
coordinates in such a way
that this map was pretty
close to a linear map,
but then these unipotent
orbits would not be vertical.
And instead, they would
kind of spiral a little bit
as you went up.
And so the angle between
two unipotent guys
would be changing.
Now, at some point, why
do you believe that?
So at some point, we
should do a computation.
I don't think I'll do it
in the last 2 minutes,
but I'll just say
what you should do.
So we figured out which
direction is compressing.
We could have written it down
a little bit more clearly.
But if you trace
through our thoughts
today, at any point in the
homogeneous space, if you
ask which is the
tangent direction that's
going to get compressed
when you apply Lar,
we have a formula for it.
And then we can also say if
you have two nearby unipotent
orbits, and down
here at the bottom
there's a little vector between
them, as you go up the orbit,
what happens to that vector?
There's a formula for that, too.
If you compare
these two formulas,
you will see that
they don't match.
So if this direction initially
was the compression direction,
compression direction,
if you follow it up,
you don't get the compression
direction up here.
And you can compute
it all with matrices.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: Is this
just kind of saying,
if there's a curvature tensor
that's non-zero from the,
I guess, one of the two
one-parameter groups?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
The question is, is
this saying that there's
some kind of curvature
tensor that doesn't vanish?
Maybe.
It's not the Riemann
curvature tensor,
but it might be
something in that spirit.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: The theorem
before is really two cases.
One, this periodic
number, the picture
kind of makes it seem
like it wasn't structured.
It's not periodic.
Is there something I'm missing?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah,
great question.
The question was, this
appears to be a proof sketch
that every orbit of
the unipotent group
is evenly distributed.
And we saw at the beginning
that that is not true.
So what did what
did we do wrong?
All right, so this orbit,
we can write this way.
Actually, so let
me say the shortest
answer to your question.
The key thing is that the
cusp of the homogeneous space
is really important here.
And we were neglecting the cusp.
So the cusp produces a piece of
the fundamental domain that's
really skinny.
And it doesn't look
like the rest of it.
And when something's in
the cusp, it doesn't apply.
And so, actually, Hedlund
proved another theorem,
which is that if you take a
cocompact subgroup gamma, then
in G mod gamma, every
unipotent orbit is dense.
And this is a sketch of
the proof of that theorem.
But now what goes wrong is
that this a to the minus Rx
could be very far in the cusp,
and then our whole analysis
is wrong.
So what we've roughly shown
is that either our orbit
is very well distributed, or a
minus Rx is deep in the cusp.
And if you unwind what
that means about x,
it means that it's very close
to being a periodic orbit.
Cool.
So we'll talk a little more
about homogeneous dynamics
on Thursday.
I'm not sure exactly
what we'll say.
Maybe we'll fill in some things.